doc: bootloader: Add documentation for external flash (#2325)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_bootloader.rst

Adding a bootloader chain to your application
*********************************************

The |NCS| includes a sample implementation of an immutable bootloader.

> As solution for implementing an upgradable bootloader, it provides and extends :doc:`mcuboot:index`.

Reviewer: No idea why I can't answer to https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/2325#discussion_r435085969
What I'm trying to state in these two sentences is what solutions the NCS provides for the bootloader chain. For the immutable bootloader, there is a sample. For the upgradable bootloader, there is our fork of MCUboot (which is an extension of the "real" MCUboot).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, |NCS| comes with a slightly modified version of :doc:`mcuboot:index`.
```

Reviewer: Almost :)
```suggestion
Additionally, the |NCS| comes with a slightly modified version of :doc:`mcuboot:index`.
```

Adding a bootloader chain to your application
*********************************************

The |NCS| includes a sample implementation of an immutable bootloader.

> As upgradable bootloader, it provides and extends :doc:`mcuboot:index`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence looks strange.

Author: @ru-fu Do you have a suggestion here. I don't really know what we want to put here.

Reviewer 2: I don't know where mcuboot:index links, otherwise I could suggest something.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As solution for implementing an upgradable bootloader, it provides and extends :doc:`mcuboot:index`.
```
The link goes to https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/mcuboot/index.html

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the link.

It still doesn't make sense to me :P. What does "it" refer to? And what does it mean to "provide and extend" MCUboot?

Reviewer: Oh, now I can actually answer ...?!
What I'm trying to state in these two sentences is what solutions the NCS provides for the bootloader chain. For the immutable bootloader, there is a sample. For the upgradable bootloader, there is our fork of MCUboot (which is an extension of the "real" MCUboot).

Reviewer 2: Ok, that makes sense. Like I said, the "it" threw me off. I thought "it" referred to the immutable bootloader.

Both bootloaders can easily be included in your application using :ref:`ug_multi_image`.

> Adding an immutable bootloader

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking this tells you how to add our specific immutable bootloader.
```suggestion
Adding the immutable bootloader
```

> ==============================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===============================
```

> To add an immutable bootloader to your application, set :option:`CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT` and add your private key file under :option:`CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_PUBLIC_KEY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the immutable bootloader to your application, set :option:`CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT` and add your private key file under :option:`CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_PUBLIC_KEY`.
```

|how_to_configure|

See the documentation of the :ref:`bootloader` sample for more information.
The :ref:`bootloader_build_and_run` section has detailed instructions for adding the immutable bootloader as first stage of the secure bootloader chain.

> Adding an upgradable bootloader

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding MCUboot as an upgradable bootloader
```

> ===============================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================
```
No idea if I got the right amount of = now - needs to be the same length as the heading. ;)

> Adding MCUboot as an upgradable bootloader
> ===============================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding MCUboot as an upgradable bootloader
==========================================
```

Author: Fixed :)

> To add an upgradable bootloader to your applications, set :option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add MCUboot to your applications, set :option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`.
For MCUboot to be upgradable, the immutable bootloader must be included.
```

> To add an upgradable bootloader in this case MCUBoot to your applications, set :option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add MCUboot as upgradable bootloader to your application, set :option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`.
```

Reviewer 2: Technically, that config just adds MCUboot. It's not upgradable until you add the immutable bootloader as well.

Reviewer: We can remove the upgradable here - it's in the next sentence.
``suggestion
To add MCUboot to your application, set :option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`.
``

|how_to_configure|

> The upgradable bootloader should always be used in combination with the immutable bootloader.

Author: This statement is maybe too forceful. To me this indicates that you'll always need both, when in reality it really depends on your use case. You may maybe just want the immutable bootloader or as stated bellow just MCUBoot without having it upgradable.

Reviewer: So what are the use cases? Using only the immutable bootloader is straight-forward (and I didn't mean that here), but when and why would you want to use an ugradable bootloader that cannot be upgraded?

Author: To upgrade your application if you don't care about trust or security. But if we take the abstract view that this is any "upgradable bootloader" I think your point is valid.

> To ensure the root of trust, you should always include the immutable bootloader as well when adding an upgradable bootloader.

Reviewer 2: This isn't really correct. MCUboot is a perfectly reasonable root of trust. You can discuss whether it's good enough since it doesn't lock flash etc., but it's designed to be an immutable bootloader.

> If you want an upgradable bootloader you should always include the immutable bootloader as well when adding MCUBoot as an upgradable bootloader.

Reviewer 2: The sentence is a bit confusing with regards to what is upgradable when.
```suggestion
To make MCUboot upgradable, the immutable bootloader must be added as well.
```

Reviewer: Small change to your suggestion:
```suggestion
To make MCUboot upgradable, you must also add the immutable bootloader.
```

.. note::
   It is possible to include this bootloader without the immutable bootloader.

>    In this case MCUboot will act as an immutable bootloader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In this case, MCUboot will act as an immutable bootloader.
```

>    However, in this case the upgradable bootloader cannot actually be upgraded, because the root of trust is missing.

Reviewer 2: This isn't really correct. It can't be upgraded because there is no bootloader to upgrade it.
```suggestion
   In this case MCUboot will act as an immutable bootloader.
```

>    In the default configuration, most |NCS| samples include the upgradable bootloader but not the immutable bootloader.
>    The reason for this is that the immutable bootloader must be configured with a private key before use.

Reviewer 3: AFAIK only a handful of samples includes mcuboot (upgardeable bootloader) - http_application_update, aws_fota, smp_svr, any more?

```suggestion
```

I don't see the value in these sentences, and to me they both look incorrect. The reason for not using the immutable bootloader is that it occupies space, and you might not need to be able to upgrade your bootloader.

Author: @ru-fu do you agree?

Reviewer 2: +1 to @hakonfam's suggestion.

Reviewer: Sure, we can remove the sentences if they are not needed.
The input I got was that to include the upgradable bootloader, you need to enable CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y  and CONFIG_SECURE_BOOTLOADER=y. And I was confused why this is not the case in the samples we provide.

> The |NCS| uses MCUboot as upgradable bootloader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
We're now saying that a few lines up already, so remove. ;)

> See :doc:`mcuboot:index` for information about the default implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :doc:`mcuboot:index` for information about the default implementation of MCUboot.
```

Reviewer 2: Why "default"? How do you get the default, and when does it stop being default (i.e. when do the linked docs stop being relevant)?

Reviewer: Well, the thing is that the linked docs should ALWAYS be relevant, but we haven't started talking about how any of this works until the release freeze ...
I can't answer that question, and I doubt we'll fix the documentation of our MCUboot fork this week.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I would suggest removing "default" then.

Reviewer 2: "See :doc:`mcuboot:index` for the official MCUboot documentation."

Reviewer: No. :( The official MCUboot documentation is on https://juullabs-oss.github.io/mcuboot/, ours is adapted a little bit, but not fully. We have taken out some topics, but not updated the ones that are included (for example, https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/mcuboot/readme-zephyr.html says that "Currently, the two image slots must be contiguous.", which is clearly wrong if one of them is in external flash).

Reviewer 2: Ok, my questions about "default" still stand, but I can live with the sentence as is :).

Reviewer: I'm not saying this is good, btw. There should definitely be a task to fix the MCUboot documentation - but this cannot be done the week before the release (which is exactly what happened last time as well ...)

:ref:`mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs` gives details on the integration of MCUboot in |NCS|.

You can configure MCUboot by setting configuration options for the ``mcuboot`` child image.

Flash partitions used by MCUboot
--------------------------------

MCUboot requires two image slots: one that contains the application to be booted (the *primary slot*), and one where a new application can be stored before it is activated (the *secondary slot*).
See the *Image Slots* section in the :doc:`MCUboot documentation <mcuboot:design>` for more information.

The |NCS| variant of MCUboot uses the :ref:`partition_manager` to configure the flash partitions for these image slots.

In the default configuration, the Partition Manager dynamically sets up the partitions as required.
If you want to control where in memory the flash partitions are placed, you can define static partitions for your application.
See :ref:`ug_pm_static` for more information.

It is possible to use external flash as the storage partition for the secondary slot.
This requires a driver for the external flash that supports:

* Single-byte read and write

> * Writing data to flash

Author: ```suggestion
* Writing data stored in internal flash

Author: I don't know how to properly formulate this requirement. But it requires that the driver is able to write data directly from flash. So usually it is done by internally copying the data to RAM in the driver if it uses DMA.

Reviewer: You mean copying data from internal flash to external flash?

Author: Yes. So most drivers that use DMA usually requires you to pass in a ram buffer but sometimes MCUBoot uses data which are stored as constants in internal flash.

See :ref:`pm_external_flash` for general information about how to set up partitions in external flash in the Partition Manager.

> To configure MCUboot to use external flash for the secondary slot, edit the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` with the following changes file::

Reviewer: "the following changes file"?! Do you mean:
```suggestion
To configure MCUboot to use external flash for the secondary slot, edit the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file with the following changes::
```
I don't like that wording. Maybe:
```suggestion
To configure MCUboot to use external flash for the secondary slot, update the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file to contain the following definition for ``mcuboot_secondary``::
```

>    mcuboot_secondary:
>    region: external_flash
>    size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   mcuboot_secondary:
       region: external_flash
       size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE
```

> To configure MCUboot to use external flash for the secondary slot, add the following code to the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file::
> 
>    mcuboot_secondary:
>        region: external_flash
>        size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE

Reviewer 2: I don't think adding the code will work, you probably have to edit the existing mcuboot_secondary definition.
```suggestion
To configure MCUboot to use external flash for the secondary slot, edit the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file to place the mcuboot_secondary partition in the external_flash region:

   mcuboot_secondary:
       region: external_flash
       ...
```

Author: That's true I'll change to your suggestion.

>        size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with using external flash, but this `size` entry doesn't look right. Isn't it enough to just add the `region` entry?

Author: From experience no, but maybe there are some new changes to partition manager which makes it figure out this?

Reviewer 2: @hakonfam why do we need to change the size?

Author: Could be to ensure the partition for `mcuboot_secondary` is the same size?

Reviewer 2: Maybe share_size doesn't work across regions?

> The following example shows how to configure an application for the nRF52840 DK to use external flash for the secondary slot, using the QSPI NOR flash driver:

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention here that the nRF52840 DK is chosen because it comes with external flash on it.

Author: Added

> The following example shows how to configure an application for the nRF52840 DK which comes with external flash to use this for the secondary slot, using the QSPI NOR flash driver:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to configure an application for the nRF52840 DK.
The nRF52840 DK comes with external flash that can be used for the secondary slot and that can be accessed using the QSPI NOR flash driver.
```

1. Add the following configuration to the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/prj.conf` file::

      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR=y
      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR_FLASH_LAYOUT_PAGE_SIZE=4096
      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR_FLASH_ALLOW_STACK_USAGE_FOR_DATA_IN_FLASH=y
      CONFIG_MULTITHREADING=y
      CONFIG_BOOT_MAX_IMG_SECTORS=256
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH=y
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_DEV_NAME="MX25R64"

>       CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE=0xee000

Author: ```suggestion
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE=0xf4000

default values changed from when I opened the PR sorry

      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_BASE=0

   These options enable the QSPI NOR flash driver, multi-threading (which is required by the flash driver), and the external flash of the nRF52840 DK.

> #. Add the following code to the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file (as described above)::

Reviewer 2: Same here regarding add vs edit.

> #. Edit the the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file (as described above)::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Update the :file:`ncs/bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr/pm.yml` file (as described above)::
```

>       mcuboot_secondary:
>       region: external_flash
>       size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      mcuboot_secondary:
          region: external_flash
          size: CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE
```

#. Add the following configuration to the :file:`prj.conf` file in your application directory::

      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR=y
      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR_FLASH_LAYOUT_PAGE_SIZE=4096
      CONFIG_NORDIC_QSPI_NOR_FLASH_ALLOW_STACK_USAGE_FOR_DATA_IN_FLASH=y
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH=y
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_DEV_NAME="MX25R64"

>       CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE=0xee000

Author: ```suggestion
      CONFIG_PM_EXTERNAL_FLASH_SIZE=0xf4000

default values changed from when I opened the PR sorry
